project-lifecycle.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Project Lifecycle
nav_order: 6
---
[//]: # (SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0)

# Project Lifecycle

The term "project" within Green Software Foundation refers to a collaborative endeavor to deliver a work item. There may be some projects that are intended to produce a document, such as a requirements or use cases document, a whitepaper, or analysis. Other projects develop a new capability, refactor, or remove an existing capability for the Green Software Foundation technology releases. Such projects may take the form of a new component (e.g., a new repository) or may propose additions, deletions, or changes to an existing repository or repositories.

Many other open source initiatives leverage an incubation process for new work items. Incubation seems to have the desired effect of encouraging new ideas and tracks of work, while at the same time providing clear guidance to the broader community as to what is real and supported, versus what is still in the exploratory, experimental, or developmental phases.

Therefore, Green Software Foundation has adopted a similar lifecycle process as follows:

![Project lifecycle in graph format](project-lifecycle.svg "Project Lifecycle Graph").

Projects are in one of six possible states:

- [Project Lifecycle](#project-lifecycle)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Incubation](#incubation)
- [Graduated](#graduated)
- [Dormant](#dormant)
- [Deprecated](#deprecated)
- [End of Life](#end-of-life)

Projects may not necessarily move through those states in a linear way and may go through several iterations.

# Proposal

Project Proposals must be submitted to the **OC** for review, using [Proposal Template](TODO). Proposals that are approved enter into an *Incubation* state, unless they are of a refactoring nature, in which case the project is turned over to the relevant project maintainers to handle as they deem fit.

A Proposal must:

-   Have a clear description
-   Have a well-defined scope
-   Identify committed development resources
-   Identify initial maintainers
-   Be vendor neutral
-   Have idetified any risks
-   Describe what success looks like
-   Know its audience/community

Project proposals which are deemed to be of high risk, for example potential for reputaional damage, financial risk, have risks for litigation, concerns about greenwashing, must also be reviewd by the Steering Committee.

# Incubation

Approved project proposals enter into *Incubation*. For new components and modules, a repository is created under the [Green Software Foundation Github org](https://github.com/Green-Software-Foundation). New features or capabilities must be handled through pull requests labeled with tags that identify the project and tag it as *incubator*. Pull requests ideally are capable of being enabled and disabled with feature-flags.

Projects in *Incubation* can overlap with one another. Entering *Incubation* is meant to be fairly easy to allow for community exploration of different ideas.

After a project qualifies to be declared *Graduated*, the *project* maintainers can then vote to request a graduation review by the OC.

Entering *Incubation* does not guarantee that the project will eventually get to the *Graduated* state. Projects may never get to the *Graduated* state.

Projects seeking to graduate from *Incubation* must meet the criteria defined in the [Incubation Exit Criteria](./project-incubation-exit.md) document.

# Graduated

Projects that have successfully exited the *Incubation* phase are in the *Graduated* phase.

# Dormant

Projects enter the *Dormant* state when the normal functions are suspended or slowed down for a period of time. The OC decides to move a project to or from the *Dormant* state upon request. If *Dormant* projects are re-activated, they re-enter the *Incubation* state even if they entered the *Dormant* state from the *Graduated* state.

# Deprecated

Anyone may propose that a project be *Deprecated* by submitting a rationale and identifying a substitute project or component, if any. The maintainers of the project shall vote on such a request and if it passes, make that recommendation to the OC. Members of the community that disagree with the request can make their case before the OC. The OC will consider all points of view and render a final decision whether to deprecate.

A *Deprecated* project will be maintained for a six month period by its community, after which it will be removed from any subsequent formal releases. Notice will be given to the public of the project deprecation. After the six-month deprecation period, the project will be labeled *End of Life*.

# End of Life

A project that is no longer actively developed or maintained.

Commit message:

more guidenace on proposal proposal responsibilities

project-lifecycle.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Project Lifecycle
nav_order: 6
---
[//]: # (SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0)

# Project Lifecycle

The term "project" within Green Software Foundation refers to a collaborative endeavor to deliver a work item. There may be some projects that are intended to produce a document, such as a requirements or use cases document, a whitepaper, or analysis. Other projects develop a new capability, refactor, or remove an existing capability for the Green Software Foundation technology releases. Such projects may take the form of a new component (e.g., a new repository) or may propose additions, deletions, or changes to an existing repository or repositories.

Many other open source initiatives leverage an incubation process for new work items. Incubation seems to have the desired effect of encouraging new ideas and tracks of work, while at the same time providing clear guidance to the broader community as to what is real and supported, versus what is still in the exploratory, experimental, or developmental phases.

Therefore, Green Software Foundation has adopted a similar lifecycle process as follows:

![Project lifecycle in graph format](project-lifecycle.svg "Project Lifecycle Graph").

Projects are in one of six possible states:

- [Project Lifecycle](#project-lifecycle)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Incubation](#incubation)
- [Graduated](#graduated)
- [Dormant](#dormant)
- [Deprecated](#deprecated)
- [End of Life](#end-of-life)

Projects may not necessarily move through those states in a linear way and may go through several iterations.

# Proposal

New project proposals must be submitted to the **OC** for review using a [Project Proposal Issue Template](https://github.com/Green-Software-Foundation/oc/issues/new?labels=project%2C+proposed&projects=&template=new-project-proposal.md&title=%5BProject%5D+Title+Of+Project). 

The Working Group identified in the project proposal as the **Governing Working Group (GWG)** discusses the proposal internally. They can ask for advice from the OC or other committees in the GSF, but ultimately, the GWG approves or rejects the project proposal. 

The OC is consulted and informed about project proposals; they can comment on project proposals and object to decisions made by the GWG, but they cannot approve projects themselves. The most common objection from the OC would be if they disagreed with the Working Group identified as the Governing Working Group for the project proposal. The bar is intentionally low for incubation projects to encourage experimentation.

Once the WG approves a project proposal, the OC has **two more weeks** to raise any objections; if none are received, the project is approved.

Proposals that are approved enter into an *Incubation* state, unless they are of a refactoring nature, in which case the project is turned over to the relevant project maintainers to handle as they deem fit.

A Proposal must:

-   Have a clear description
-   Have a well-defined scope
-   Identify committed development resources
-   Identify initial maintainers
-   Be vendor neutral
-   Have idetified any risks
-   Describe what success looks like
-   Know its audience/community

Project proposals which are deemed to be of high risk, for example potential for reputaional damage, financial risk, have risks for litigation, concerns about greenwashing, must also be reviewd by the Steering Committee.

# Incubation

Approved project proposals enter into *Incubation*. For new components and modules, a repository is created under the [Green Software Foundation Github org](https://github.com/Green-Software-Foundation). New features or capabilities must be handled through pull requests labeled with tags that identify the project and tag it as *incubator*. Pull requests ideally are capable of being enabled and disabled with feature-flags.

Projects in *Incubation* can overlap with one another. Entering *Incubation* is meant to be fairly easy to allow for community exploration of different ideas.

After a project qualifies to be declared *Graduated*, the *project* maintainers can then vote to request a graduation review by the OC.

Entering *Incubation* does not guarantee that the project will eventually get to the *Graduated* state. Projects may never get to the *Graduated* state.

Projects seeking to graduate from *Incubation* must meet the criteria defined in the [Incubation Exit Criteria](./project-incubation-exit.md) document.

# Graduated

Projects that have successfully exited the *Incubation* phase are in the *Graduated* phase.

# Dormant

Projects enter the *Dormant* state when the normal functions are suspended or slowed down for a period of time. The OC decides to move a project to or from the *Dormant* state upon request. If *Dormant* projects are re-activated, they re-enter the *Incubation* state even if they entered the *Dormant* state from the *Graduated* state.

# Deprecated

Anyone may propose that a project be *Deprecated* by submitting a rationale and identifying a substitute project or component, if any. The maintainers of the project shall vote on such a request and if it passes, make that recommendation to the OC. Members of the community that disagree with the request can make their case before the OC. The OC will consider all points of view and render a final decision whether to deprecate.

A *Deprecated* project will be maintained for a six month period by its community, after which it will be removed from any subsequent formal releases. Notice will be given to the public of the project deprecation. After the six-month deprecation period, the project will be labeled *End of Life*.

# End of Life

A project that is no longer actively developed or maintained.
